RNAseq: Now What?
========================================================
author: Julin N Maloof
date: May 25, 2017
autosize: true

Now what?
==========
Now we have lists of genes that are differentially expressed in non-dense vs dense plantings.

What do we do we these lists:

We could look at the list one gene at a time.

Problems?

Category Enrichment
===================
Instead of looking gene-by-gene we might want to know if any _categories_ of genes are enriched.

Why?

GO Categories
===============
The [Gene Ontology(GO) consortium](http://www.geneontology.org/) aims to provide a structured, hierarchical vocabulary for defining the function of genes.

Each gene can be assigned one or more GO term describing it.

GO terms themselves are grouped into three categories:

1. Biological Process (BP)
2. Molecular Function (MF)
3. Cellular Compartment (CC)

I generally find the BP class the most useful but you can look at all three as we go through the lab.

Using GO terms
==============
With GO terms we can ask if particular GO categories are enriched among differentially expressed genes.

To this we build a 2x2 contingency table:

                                             |Other genes | DE genes
---------------------------------------------|------------|------------
has GO term "Salt Stress"                    |     1000   | 
does **not** have <br> GO term "Salt Stress" |     9000   | 

* If there are a total of 1000 DE genes, how many do you expect to have the GO term "Salt Stress" just by random chance?

Using GO terms
==============

EXPECTATION

                                             |Other genes | DE genes
---------------------------------------------|------------|------------
has GO term "Salt Stress"                    |     1000   |  100
does **not** have <br> GO term "Salt Stress" |     9000   |  900


Using GO terms
==============

What if this was the result?

                                             |Other genes | DE genes
---------------------------------------------|------------|------------
has GO term "Salt Stress"                    |     1000   |  200
does **not** have <br> GO term "Salt Stress" |     9000   |  800

Using GO terms
==============

What if this was the result?

                                             |Other genes | DE genes
---------------------------------------------|------------|------------
has GO term "Salt Stress"                    |     1000   |  200
does **not** have <br> GO term "Salt Stress" |     9000   |  800

* About twice as many DE genes have the GO term "Salt Stress" compared to what we expected.
* We can perform a test to determine if this difference is significantly different.
* If so, we conclude that the DE gene are enriched for "Salt Stress", indicating that this process may be specifically regulated in response to our treatment. 

An added wrinkle
=================
We may need to correct for "length bias"

* It is easier to find differnetial expression of longer genes.
* If GO terms are not evenly distributed across gene lengths this creates bias.
* We will use an R package that corrects for this possiblity.

Promoter Motif Enrichment
=========================
As you know transcription factors bind to specific DNA sequences or "motifs".

Similar to looking for enrichment of GO terms among our DE genes we can also look for enrichment of transcription factor binding motifs in the promoters of DE genes.

Why would we want to do this?  (What hypotheses might be generated by such an analysis?)


