---
layout: lab
hidden: true
title: 'IME Lab'
output: html_document
tags:
---


Assignment 8: Sequence Composition
============================

## Intro

Intron-mediated enhancement (IME) is the well-known phenomenon in which
introns improve gene expression. This has been observed in plants,
animals, and fungi, but the mechanism is largely unknowns. IME is best
understood in plants due to the research of Alan Rose and Ian Korf of UC
Davis (really). In this lab, we will investigate the nucleotide signals
of IME. See the original Rose et al paper (Plant Cell 2008) for more
info.

Some features of IME in plants include the following:

* Not all introns enhance expression
* The mechanism is not related to transcription initiation
* Enhancing signals are dispersed, redundant, and additive
* Enhancing signals must be near the promoter to have an effect

This leads to a model in which (some special) introns alter the
polymerase as it transcribes the intron, making it more processive
(faster or less likely to fall off). Genes without these special introns
near the promoter are less likely to make complete transcripts. This is
pretty important when designing a trans-gene with high expression.

What sequences are responsible for improving expression? In this lab, we
are going to start by asking a very important question: **are introns
near the promoter compositionally different from other introns farther
downstream?** The biological model predicts that they should be.

If we find a difference, we can do the following:

* Build a discriminator that predicts/measures how much a sequence enhances expression
* Find the most enhancing intron in the genome: it could be very useful for biotechnology applications
* Identify the biological signals involved
* Get some clues about the mechanism of IME
* Build synthetic introns with signals more powerful than any natural intron (mwahahaha - that was a mad scientist's laugh)


## Setup

Clone the Assignment_8 repository from Github.

There are several programs and files you will need. You can download
these as a [tar-ball](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/733402/imelab.tar.gz).


* `kmer_stats.pl`: perl script that reports the frequency and count of each k-mer
* `kl_distance.pl`: perl script that calculates the Kullback-Leibler distance between a pair of kmer frequencies (produced by the script above)
* `discriminator.pl`: perl script that reports which of two kmer frequencies a sequence is most similar to
* `FAlite.pm`: a perl module that assists in reading FASTA files (used in the background by `kmer_stats.pl` and `discriminator.pl`
* `introns.*.fa`: 9 different files of introns (`introns.1.fa` is the first intron of a gene, `introns.2.fa` is the second and so on).

Add this directory to your PATH environment variable so that you can
call the programs easily. Alternatively, since they are all perl
scripts, you can simply type `perl` ahead of the command because `perl`
is in your path.

This lab has a lot of copy-paste activity (or you can type). When
following a cookbook, one sometimes becomes a robot who simply follows
directions. Don't do that. Examine each command you type and if any part
is unfamiliar, find out what it does (ask 2 other students before asking
the instructors). Also examine the output files at every step. **DON'T BE
A ROBOT.**

## Exercise 1: Sequence Gazing

Our biological model suggests that introns near the promotor are
compositionally distinct from introns farther downstream. Lets see if we
can detect that by eye. Look at the `introns.1.fa` file, which contains
introns near the start of a gene. Compare that with another file on
introns, such as `introns.7.fa`.

**Q1:** Can you see any obvious differences by eye?

## Exercise 2: K-mer Counting

Use the `kmer_stats.pl` program to report the mono-nucleotide
compositions of several files. If you added the working directory to the
path, you can use the first command. If not, use the second, and precede
all of your perl command lines with `perl`.

	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.1.fa
	perl kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.1.fa
	
Continue on...	
	
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.2.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.3.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.4.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.5.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.6.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.7.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.8.fa
	kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.9.fa

You can replace robotic typing (or copy-paste) with a `for` loop of
course.

	for i in `seq 1 9` ; do kmer_stats.pl -k 1 introns.$i.fa ; done

**Q2:** Do the compositions of introns at different locations look
different by mono-nucleotide composition?

Biological signals, like binding sites, often span several nucleotides.
Try increasing the value of `-k` to see if there are higher order
differences that aren't visible in single letters. The natural language
equivalence would be noting that English and Spanish have very similar
letter frequencies but not the same word frequencies.

	kmer_stats.pl -k 5 introns.1.fa

That's a little difficult to read and compare, so let's get some help
from some Unix commands. First, we can save the output of
`kmer_stats.pl` to individual files. In the nomenclature below, the
first number `$i` is the intron position and the `5` is the value of K.

	for i in `seq 1 9`; do ./kmer_stats.pl -k 5 introns.$i.fa > counts.$i.5.txt ; done

To compare two files by eye, we can use the `paste` command. Try
comparing a few.

	paste counts.1.5.txt counts.2.5.txt
	paste counts.2.5.txt counts.6.5.txt

**Q3:** Do you see any obvious differences? Do you think these are
statistically relevant or just random noise? How could you tell the
difference?

## Exercise 3: Relative Entropy

There are many ways to compare two distributions. We are going to use
Kullback-Leibler distance with the `kl_distance.pl` program. It reports
the relative entropy difference between two distributions. A value of
zero indicates the distributions are identical. The more different the
distributions, the greater the K-L distance. Try a few combinations.

	kl_distance.pl counts.1.5.txt counts.2.5.txt
	kl_distance.pl counts.2.5.txt counts.6.5.txt

Now you must be scheming "let's compare all these files to each other!"
Yes, let's. Nested loops look ugly on the command line, so let's script
it. Save the code below in a file called `loop_kl.sh` and then run it
(either by making it executable or by `sh loop_kl.sh`.

	#!/bin/bash
	for i in `seq 1 9`; do
		for j in `seq 1 9`; do
			echo -n "$i vs $j: "
			kl_distance.pl counts.$i.5.txt counts.$j.5.txt
		done
	done

**Q4:** Which introns are similar and different from others? Are first
introns different from introns farther downstream as suggested by the
biological model of IME?

To simplify our lives a little, let's alias/create some new files that
contain an approximately equal number of *proximal* and *distal* introns.

	ln -s introns.1.fa proximal.fa
	cat introns.[6-9].fa > distal.fa

Previously, we had set K to 5 (quite arbitrarily). Let's try other
values of K to see which one is most different.

	for k in `seq 1 9`; do
		kmer_stats.pl -k $k proximal.fa > counts.proximal.$k.txt
		kmer_stats.pl -k $k distal.fa   > counts.distal.$k.txt
		echo -n "k=$k "
		kl_distance.pl counts.proximal.$k.txt counts.distal.$k.txt
	done

**Q5:** The program reported some errors at high values of K. Any idea
why?

## Exercise 4: IMEter-ish

We now have a set of k-mer frequencies for proximal and distal introns.
And we can see that they are a little different from each other. Now
let's use the `discriminator.pl` program to score some introns. Run
these commands and visually inspect the outputs.

	discriminator.pl counts.proximal.4.txt counts.distal.4.txt proximal.fa
	discriminator.pl counts.proximal.4.txt counts.distal.4.txt distal.fa

The score for each intron is calculated by simply summing up the
log-odds score that a specific k-mer (in this case 4-mer) is _emitted_
from the proximal vs. distal distribution. So, a positive score
indicates that a sequence looks like a proximal intron and a negative
score indicates it looks like a distal intron. This is exactly what the
IMEter does (see Rose & Korf paper) but with some boundary conditions
thrown in.

**Q6:** What is the average score of a proximal intron? What is the
average score of a distal intron? Use R to plot histograms. If you want
to get even more fancy, you could plot histograms for each intron
position (1, 2, 3, etc.).

Does the discriminator acutally work? One of the files in the tar-ball
is `db_IME_Rose_WT_introns.fa`. This contains experimentally-tested
introns. Each intron was cloned into a GST gene and its gene expression
was measured in A. thaliana multiple times. If you look at the FASTA
header, you'll see the fold increase as **x4.3** for example. Let's run
the discriminator on this file and then compare molecular biology to
discriminator scores. To do this, we need to (1) pull the experimental
values from the file, (2) run the discriminator on the introns, and then
(3) merge the fold-changes with the predictions into a single table.
This is accomplished by the three command lines below.

	perl -lane 'print substr($F[2],1) if />/' db_IME_Rose_WT_introns.fa > observed.txt
	
	perl discriminator.pl counts.proximal.4.txt counts.distal.4.txt db_IME_Rose_WT_introns.fa > predicted.txt
	
	paste predicted.txt observed.txt > ime.txt

So this is a good time to remember the earlier admonition: **DON'T BE A
ROBOT**. What exactly is each command doing? What does the output look
like at each step?

Let's load `ime.txt` into R, build a linear model, and report r-squared.

	ime <- read.delim("ime.txt", header=FALSE)
	ime.data <- data.frame(ime[2], ime[3])
	plot(ime.data)
	ime.lm <- lm(ime.data)
	summary(ime.lm)$r.squared

Now let's imagine you want to do the R parts in an automated way. For
example, you might want to try various values of K. Alternatively, you
might want to break up the data set in some way different from the
proximal (1st introns) and distal (6th-9th introns) we did above (you
could try every combination). That's no problem, but let's just do K for
simplicity. Save the lines above in a script called `rsquared.R` and
then write the script below and call it `loop_R.sh`.

	#!/bin/sh
	for i in `seq 1 6` ; do
		perl discriminator.pl counts.proximal.$i.txt counts.distal.$i.txt db_IME_Rose_WT_introns.fa > predicted.txt
		paste predicted.txt observed.txt > ime.txt
		R --vanilla < rsquared.R > rsq.$i.txt
		mv Rplots.pdf plot.$i.pdf
	done

**Q7:** What values of K work well? Why do you think that is? How does
data set size influence the optimal value of K?

**Q8:** Which intron in _A. thaliana_ is predicted to enhance expression
the most?

**Q9:** Extra credit questions. Supposing that the IME signal is a
protein binding site, how could you identify the binding site motif?
Given the motif, how could you determine if the signal was RNA or
DNA-based? How could you construct a synthetic intron more powerful than
any naturally occurring one?
