---
layout: lab
title: Working with Illumina Sequence data
hidden: true    <!-- To prevent post from being displayed as regular blog post -->
tags:
- Brassica
- Illumina
- Linux
---

Today we begin a series of six labs that all work with the same data set.  The data is RNA sequencing data generated from [_Brassica rapa_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brassica_rapa), a plant with varieties that can be grown for turnips, napa cabbage, or oil seeds (like canola).

In these labs we will explore how gene expression is influenced by plant variety, growth conditions, and organ type.  In this experiment we have:

* Two plant varieties:
    * IMB211: a variety with rapid reproduction that has been bred for laboratory work
    * R500: an oil-seed variety
* Multiple growth conditions
    - growth chamber: simulated sun or shade
    - greenhouse: crowded or uncrowded
    - field: crowded or uncrowded
* Multiple tissue types
    - seedling stem (hypocotyl)
    - leaf blade
    - lead petiole
    - root
    - internode
    - inflorescence (young flower stem)
    - silique (fruit)

We won't work with all of these samples through all of the labs, but the final section on genetic networks will make use of most of them.

Over the next several weeks the goals are to:

1. Learn about Illumina reads, how to map them, and quality control (today)
2. How to view reads in a genome browser and how to find single nucleotide polymorphisms (next week)
3. Find genes that are differentially expressed between genotypes or treatments
4. Ask if differentially expressed genes have any common functionality (Gene ontologies) or promoter motifs
5. Build a gene regulatory network to determine how genes connect to one another.

## Background for today's lab.

### Fastq files
The raw output from an Illumina sequencer is a [fastq file](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format).  Illumina sequencers generate 100 million to 200 million sequences of 50 to 250 bp in length per flow-cell "lane".

### Illumina Sequencing
You can read more about the technology at [Illumina's website](http://www.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-marketing/documents/products/illumina_sequencing_introduction.pdf) and you can watch a short video on Illumina sequencing [here](https://www.youtube.com/embed/HMyCqWhwB8E?iframe&rel=0&autoplay=1)

### Multiplexing
Because each lane on a sequencer generates 150-200M reads we often want to run more than one sample per lane.  This is cause multiplexing.  After sequencing we want to assign each read to the sample that it originaly came from.  How?  When libraries are made we include a short "barcode" or "index" on each adapter that indicates the library from which it came.  We can then read the barcode from each sequence to assign it to a particular sample.  

There are two general procedures.  __In line__ barcodes are placed at the ends of the adapter, adjacent to the DNA of interest.  They are the first bases sequenced and form the beginning of the read.  This the type of barcodes that we have in this data set.  In this case the end user (us) must sort the reads according to the barcodes and trim the barcodes off of the DNA sequence.

__Index__ barcodes are internal in the adapter and are read in a separate, short sequencing reaction.  In this case Illumina software will automatically sort the sequence reads for the end-user before delivery.

### Quality Control
The Illumina sequencer assigns a [phred quality score Q](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phred_quality_score) to each base of sequence.  The quality ranges from 0(low) to 41 (high) and is defined as Q = -10*log10(P) where P is the probability of an error.  So a phred score of 40 corresponds to an error probablity of 1 in 10,000 ( P = 10^-(Q/10) ) In current Illumina data these are encoded as the ascii characters "!"=0 to "J"=41, but in previous Illumina data the range was from "@"=0 or "B"=3 to "h"=40  See the [fastq wiki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format#Encoding) for more information.  

### Mapping
Our overall goals with this sequence data are to

1. Find single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the two genotypes, R500 and IMB211
2. Find genes that are differentially expressed.

In order to do either of these we need to know where in the genome the reads map.

There are a number of [read mapping programs available](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_sequence_alignment_software#Short-Read_Sequence_Alignment).  Two of the more popular ones are [bwa](http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/) and [bowtie2](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml).  Because we are mapping RNAseq to a genomic reference we want a program that will splice across introns.  [tophat](http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml) is a program that uses bowtie2 to map across introns and that is what we will use here.  If I am mapping RNAseq to cDNAs or genomic sequence data to a genomic reference I usually use BWA, but both should perform well.

## Outline of work

1. Check FASTQ quality
2. Trim reads to keep high-quality reads
3. Split reads based on barcodes
4. Map to reference genome

## Files

We will work with the following file types today

* .fastq -- file of short read data
* .fa -- fasta files for reference genome
* .sam -- [sequence alignment/map file for mapped reads](http://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf)
* .bam -- the binary version of a sam file
* .bai -- index for bam files
* .gff --

# The Lab

## setup

### additional software

There are a couple of additional packages that need to be installed on your computer for today's lab.  

First make a directory to hold these new packages.  Use your Linux commands to make a new directory called `BioinformaticsPackages` either in your home directory or, if you are not using snapshots and are just using MEGAsync, then make it within your MEGAsync folder.

#### Trimmomatic

Change directories to your new bioinformatics tools directory.  Download [Trimmomatic](http://www.usadellab.org/cms/?page=trimmomatic), a program to filter reads based on quality scores and other criteria.

    cd ~/BioinformaticsPackages #OR include MEGAsync in the path if that is where you put it
    wget http://www.usadellab.org/cms/uploads/supplementary/Trimmomatic/Trimmomatic-0.36.zip
    unzip Trimmomatic-0.36.zip
    
The trimmomatic program itself is written in java.  We can write a short shell script to make it easier to execute trimmomatic from the command line.  First cd into the Trimmomatic directory

    cd Trimmomatic-0.36
    
Then create a new file in this directory called `trimmomatic.sh`.  (You can use `nano` or `atom`).  Depending on where you put BioinformaticsPackages, the new file should contain the following:

    #!/bin/sh
    java -jar $HOME/BioinformaticsPackages/Trimmomatic-0.33/trimmomatic-0.36.jar

OR

    #!/bin/sh
    java -jar $HOME/MEGAsync/BioinformaticsPackages/Trimmomatic-0.33/trimmomatic-0.36.jar $*
    
Next tell linux that the new file is executable

    chmod u+x trimmomatic.sh

#### auto_barcode

[auto_barcode](https://github.com/mfcovington/auto_barcode) is a program for splitting fastq reads based on their barcode, written by Mike Covington, a bioinformaticist in the Maloof Lab.

Go to [the webpage](https://github.com/mfcovington/auto_barcode) and clone the repository into your `BioinformaticsPackages` directory

#### Set the path

We also need to tell our shell that we have some new programs we want to make available for execution on the command line. You have to edit your `~/.profile` file to update the PATH variable to include the directory where you put Trimmomatic (`~/BioinformaticsPackages/Trimmomatic-0.36`) and auto_barcode (`~/BioinformaticsPackages/auto_barcode`). Include the the line below with the path to your Trimmomatic and autobarcode at the end of the file.

	PATH="$HOME/BioinformaticsPackages/Trimmomatic-0.36:$HOME/BioinformaticsPackages/auto_barcode:$PATH"
    
 OR
 
    PATH="$HOME/MEGAsync/BioinformaticsPackages/Trimmomatic-0.36:$HOME/MEGAsync/BioinformaticsPackages/auto_barcode:$PATH"
 

You can use `nano` for this task.

This tells the shell that the paths to your applications should also include `BLAST`. The colon character separates the various directories. If you want to see all the locations in your `PATH`, do the following.

	printenv PATH

From now on, every time you open a new terminal, your PATH will include the various BLAST programs. To update your current shell, you must do the following:

	source ~/.profile

Lets make sure the PATH was updated

	printenv PATH

Test `barcode_split_trim.pl` to make sure it works.

	barcode_split_trim.pl

That should produce a usage statement. If you got an error saying `command not found` you either made an error in your `.profile` or you didn't `source` it.

Test `trimmomatic` to make sure it works

    trimmomatic.sh
    
This should produce a short usage statement.

### Data

* Clone your Assignment_5 repository.  
* Change directories into the Assignment_5 directory.
* Now change directories into the Brapa_reference directory.

Download and unzip the Brassica rapa fasta reference file:

    wget http://jnmaloof.github.io/BIS180L_web/data/BrapaV1.5_chrom_only.fa.gz
    gunzip BrapaV1.5_chrom_only.fa.gz

Download the Brassica rapa gff reference file:

    wget http://jnmaloof.github.io/BIS180L_web/data/Brapa_gene_v1.5.gff.gz
    gunzip Brapa_gene_v1.5.gff.gz

* Change directories to the Brapa_fastq directory

Download the fastq file

    wget http://malooflab.phytonetworks.org/downloads/BIS180L/GH.lane67.fastq.gz
    
_Note: I have placed these filenames in the `.gitignore` file for this repository so they will not be uploaded to github; they are too big_

## Index the B. rapa genome

bowtie2 will needs a memory-efficient index of the reference genome file.  We create that with the command below.  It takes about 10 minutes to run.  While it is running you can continue on to "Check sequence quality", below.

The first argument is the filename of the reference (fasta) file.  The second argument is the filename "stem" for the resulting index.

    bowtie2-build BrapaV1.5_chrom_only.fa BrapaV1.5_chrom_only

## Checkout the fastq file

Take a look at the fastq file

__Exercise 1:__  

__a__ What is the read length? (can you do this without manually counting?)  
__b__ What is the machine name?  
__c__ How may reads are in this file? (show how you figured this out)  
__d__ Are the quality scores Phred+33 or Phred+64? (how did you figure this out?)

## Check sequence quality
We want to know if our reads have good sequence quality and to check for other possible errors in the sequence data.  Type fastqc at the command line and point it to your fastq or fastq.gz file.  (It is also possible to run fastqc entirely from the command line if you are processing many fastq files).

__Exercise 2:__Compare your fastq results to the examples of [good sequence](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/good_sequence_short_fastqc.html) and [bad sequence](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/bad_sequence_fastqc.html) on the fastqc website.  Comment on any FastQC items that have an "X" by them in the report.  What might have caused these issues? (hint: think about barcodes).

## Filter reads
It is generally a good idea to trim reads when their quality drops below 20 or so.  We will use trimmomatic.  

__Exercise 3:__Take a look at the [trimmomatic web page](http://www.usadellab.org/cms/?page=trimmomatic) and [user manual](http://www.usadellab.org/cms/uploads/supplementary/Trimmomatic/TrimmomaticManual_V0.30.pdf) and figure out how to modify the command below to clip after the average read quality across 4 bases drops to 20 or less.  AND only retain reads where the trimmed length is 50bp or more.

__Modify__ and then run this command

    trimmomatic.sh SE -phred64 GH.lane67.fastq.gz GH.lane67.trimmed.fastq SLIDINGWINDOW:5:15 MINLEN:70

__a__ What trimmomatic command did you use?  
__b__ How many reads were removed by trimming?  
__c__ Trimmomatic has the option to remove Illumina adapters.  Why did we not do that here?  
__d__ rerun FastQC on the trimmed sequences.  Which issues did the trimming fix?

(If you want a good challenge you can try to figure out how many reads were trimmed...)

## Barcode Spliting

The fastq file contains reads from many different samples, indexed with a 5' barcode on each read.  We need to split the reads according to the barcode and then remove the barcode from the 5' end.

__Excercise 4:__ Look at the [README for auto_barcode](https://github.com/mfcovington/auto_barcode) and figure out how to run it to split your samples.  Specify that the split fastq files are placed in the directory `split_fq`.  __Use the perl (.pl) version of the script__

__a__ what command did you use?  
__b__ what percentage of reads did not match a barcode?  What are possible explanations?

## Mapping

Now map align the sequences to the indexed reference.  We will use tophat, which in turn calls bowtie2.  tophat handles the splice junctions whereas bowtie2 actually maps the fastq sequences to the genome.  Note that there are many options that could be specified (See man `bowtie2` and `man tophat`).

Change directories back to Brassica_Assignment

A single fastq file could be mapped using:

    tophat --phred64-quals -p 2 Brapa_reference/BrapaV1.5_chrom_only  Brapa_fastq/split_fq/IMB211_DP_1_SILIQUE.fq

__Exercise 5:__ use a bash for loop run tophat on all of the fastq files.

__IMPORTANT__   By default tophat will write to directory "tophat\_out".  If you run it multiple times it will overwrite the contents of this directory each time.  Therefore __be sure to have your for loop write to a new directory for each fastq file!__

__IMPORTANT2__ This will probably take about an hour to run.  It is not important that it completes running, but I do want you have a working version of the for loop.
