---
title: "R Practice"
layout: lab
tags: R
hidden: true
---

## Practice what you learned from `swirl()`

The exercises below will give you additional practice with the building blocks that you learned in `swirl()`

Open up the `Assignment_3_template.Rmd` file in your repository and work from there.  Save, commit, and push your file changes to the github repository after you complete each exercise.

One function in R is `sum()`, which sums it arguments.

**EXERCISE 1:**  Use sum() to determine the sum of numbers from 2000 to 20000.  Provide your code and the actual sum in your answer.

### Objects
In `swirl` you learned about variables.  Another (and more inclusive) name for variables is *objects*. Objects in R are used to store data, results, and even functions.  The following should be familiar to you:

```r
a <- 5
b <- 2:20
a
b
```
**EXERCISE 2:** In one or two sentences, describe what the above code snippet it did.

You can list the objects in your workspace by using the `ls()` function.  Objects can be removed using the `rm()` function.  Objects are also shown in the upper right-hand pane.  Try:

```r
d <- "I just want to be deleted"
d
ls() #note that you have to include the parentheses for a function even if no arguments are needed.
rm(d)
ls()
d #generates an error because we removed it
```
Note that in the above snippet I again used the comment character "#".  Any text that follows a "#" is considered a comment and is not interpreted.  I highly recommend extensively commenting your code to explain what you are doing.  What makes sense today will seem like gibberish tomorrow.  Comments can help.

**EXERCISE 3:** Add the contents of a and b together and place the results in a new object.  Examine the result.  Include your code.  Try using both `sum()` and `+`; do you get different results?  If so, why?

In the `swirl()` tutorial you learned how to use the brackets [] to extract elements from objects.  Lets practice here.

**Exercise 4:** What is the sum of the 5th through 10th element of object b?  Provide your code and the sum.

**Exercise 5:** What is the sum of the 3rd, 8th, and 10th element of b?  For both of these exercises should only need to have "b" in your code once.

### 2 Dimensional Objects
You were also introduced to 2-dimensional objects in `swirl()`.  Lets get a bit more practice with them here.  The matrix command makes 2-dimensional objects.  When extracting from a multi-dimensional object you must specify both dimensions within the square brackets.

```r
m <- matrix(data=1:25,ncol=5,byrow=T)
m
m[5,5]
```
**Exercise 6:** When extracting from a 2-dimensional object, which number specifies rows and which specifies columns?  What does `m[3,]` do?  How can you extract the 3rd, 4th and 5th columns of m together as one object?

Type `cbind(m,101:105)`.

**Exercise 7:** What does the cbind command do?  How about rbind?  Create a new object "n" where the first row is a new row of numbers (your choice) and the following rows are the followed by the m matrix. Extra credit: do the same but reverse the order of the rows from m.

## Analyzing the BLAST results from Unit 1

Now that you have some R fundamentals lets deploy them on the blast results from the previous BLAST lab.

### Data import
The easiest way to bring data into R is in a .csv (comma-separated values) or .tsv/.txt (tab-separated or space-separated values) files.  Today we already have the file in the correct format.  In the future if you need to import other data into R, both of these formats can be created in Excel (choose "Save As..." in Excel and select the correct format).  The relevant R import functions are `read.delim()` and `read.csv()`

Download our BLASTP search of the fly and worm proteomes from the following link:
[blast output](http://jnmaloof.github.io/BIS180L_web/data/fly2worm.blastp.gz). The file was created using the following command (note the E-value):

	blastp -db flypep -query wormpep -threshold 15 -num_threads 3 -outfmt 6 -evalue 1e-10 > fly2worm.blastp
	gzip fly2worm.blastp

The file is 31M uncompressed and 5.7M compressed. One of the most common problems we run into as bioinformaticians is running out of disk space. Get in the habit of compressing files when you can. In this case, the file is 1/5 the size when compressed. That's pretty typical of text files. R will read compressed files just fine.

Back in R, import the file:

```r
fly.worm <- read.delim("../data/fly2worm.blastp.gz",header=F)
#change the file name and path to match whatever you used.
#the header=F argument tells R that the first row contains data, not column names
#takes a while to read in this large data set.
```
Look in the right hand pane and you can see a brief description of the data.  There are 504101 rows and 12 columns.  It is important that you look at files after they have been read in with the `head()` and `summary()` functions.

```r
head(fly.worm) #first six rows
summary(fly.worm) #summarizes the first 20 columns
```

It is a bit of a bummer that we do not have appropriate column names.  The column name info can be found if you had used `-outfmt 7`. Let's label these with short names.

```r
colnames(fly.worm) <- c("qid",
                        "sid",
                        "pct",
                        "len",
                        "mis",
                        "gaps",
                        "qb",
                        "qe",
                        "sb",
                        "se",
                        "E",
                        "S")
```
Now lets try the `head()` and `summary()` functions again.

```r
head(fly.worm)
summary(fly.worm)
```
You can see that `summary()` has provided some nice summary statistics for each numeric column.

Using what you learned from `swirl()` answer the following questions.  Show your code.

**Exercise 8**:
* How many hits have an e-value of 0?
* How many have hits have a percent identity > 50?
* Recalculate the above values but in percentage of hits rather than absolute values.
* How many hits have an e-value of 0 and have a percent identity less than 50?
* What is the minimum percent identity of the hits with an E-value equal to 0?

**Excercise 9**:
* Are you surprised that sequences with relatively low percent identity can still have an E-value of 0?
* State a hypothesis about what alignment properties might produce a zero E-value even when the percent identity is less than 50%.
* Test your hypothesis

**Excercise 10**:
It sometimes is useful to create a random subset of a large data set like the fly.worm results.  Create a new dataframe `fly.worm.small` that has 10,000 rows taken at random from the larger data set.

## Intro to plotting
One of the strengths of R is its graphics.  We are going to take a break from the bioinformatics datasets and work on a tutorial made by the 2014 TA Ciera.  This dataset uses the [stereotypes.csv file](http://cierareports.org/downloads/r_tutorial/stereotypes.csv) which you can download by clicking on link.

Ciera describes the dataset as follows: "799 individuals were surveyed from ages 18 to 26 about their weekly their consumption habits. They were further categorized based on their clothing and music choices and put into four stereotypes: nerds, hipsters, metalheads, and hippies. Consumption of coffee (per cup), computer usage (hourly), showers, beers(per 12oz), and tacos. Oh yeah, this dataset is fake."

Before beginning, import the "stereotypes.csv" into an R object called "stereotypes"

**Exercise 11**:
Use the `summary()` and `head()` functions to examine the stereotypes object.

### the subset command
In `swirl` you learned how to subset objects using square brackets [].  An alternative method is to use the `subset()` command.  To learn about the subset command, go to [Ciera's tutorial](http://cierareports.org/blog/2013/10/18/rCourse2013/index.html) and scroll down until you get to the part on subset() (It is near "Question 1".  Work through the tutorial section on subsetting.  Record the answers to your "activity breaks" in your R Notebook.

### Plotting tutorial
Now that you know about `subsetting`, it is time to follow the plotting tutorial.

Please follow the __visualization__ part of [Ciera's tutorial](http://cierareports.org/blog/2013/10/18/rCourse2013/index.html#section2).  You can stop when you get to "Basic Statistics".  Record the answers to the "activity break sections" in your R markdown file.

Remember to save and commit your Rmarkdown file.

### Visualization of the BLAST data set
Now lets apply what we have learned to the BLAST data set.

**Exercise 12**
Use ggplot to explore the relationship between score ("S") and alignment length("align_length").  Provide a plot that illustrates the relationship and describe the relationship in words.

**Excercise 13**
While you might expect that BLAST results with long alignments would have high scores, this is not always the case.  Form a hypothesis as to what might influence the relationship between alignment length and score.  Use ggplot to make a new plot to explore this hypothesis.  Does the plot support your hypothesis or not?  State your hypothesis, provide the code for your plot, and state your conclusion.

** Turning in the assignment**

* Clixk the "Preview" Button to generate an up-to-date html version of your notebook.  Check it to make sure you are happy with its content.
* add your .Rmd and .nb.html files to the repository and commit the changes.
* push the changes
