---
title: "R Practice"
layout: lab
tags: R
hidden: true
---

## Practice what you learned from `swirl()`

The exercises below will give you additional practice with the building blocks that you learned in `swirl()`

Open up the `Assignment_3_template_1.Rmd` file in your repository and work from there.  Save, commit, and push your file changes to the github repository after you complete each exercise.

One function in R is `sum()`, which sums it arguments.

**EXERCISE 1:**  Use sum() to determine the sum of numbers from 2000 to 20000.  Provide your code and the actual sum in your answer.

### Objects
In `swirl` you learned about variables.  Another (and more inclusive) name for variables is *objects*. Objects in R are used to store data, results, and even functions.  The following should be familiar to you:

```r
a <- 5
b <- 2:20
a
b
```
**EXERCISE 2:** In one or two sentences, describe what the above code snippet it did.

You can list the objects in your workspace by using the `ls()` function.  Objects can be removed using the `rm()` function.  Objects are also shown in the upper right-hand pane.  Try:

```r
d <- "I just want to be deleted"
d
ls() #note that you have to include the parentheses for a function even if no arguments are needed.
rm(d)
ls()
d #generates an error because we removed it
```
Note that in the above snippet I again used the comment character "#".  Any text that follows a "#" is considered a comment and is not interpreted.  I highly recommend extensively commenting your code to explain what you are doing.  What makes sense today will seem like gibberish tomorrow.  Comments can help.

**EXERCISE 3:** Add the contents of a and b together and place the results in a new object.  Examine the result.  Include your code.  Try using both `sum()` and `+`; do you get different results?  If so, why?

In the `swirl()` tutorial you learned how to use the brackets [] to extract elements from objects.  Lets practice here.

**Exercise 4:** What is the sum of the 5th through 10th element of object b?  Provide your code and the sum.

**Exercise 5:** What is the sum of the 3rd, 8th, and 10th element of b?  

For both of these exercises you should only need to have "b" in your code once.

### 2 Dimensional Objects
You were also introduced to 2-dimensional objects in `swirl()`.  Lets get a bit more practice with them here.  The matrix command makes 2-dimensional objects.  When extracting from a multi-dimensional object you must specify both dimensions within the square brackets.

```r
m <- matrix(data=1:25,ncol=5,byrow=T)
m
m[5,5]
```
**Exercise 6:** When extracting from a 2-dimensional object, which number specifies rows and which specifies columns?  What does `m[3,]` do?  How can you extract the 3rd, 4th and 5th columns of m together as one object?

Type `cbind(m,101:105)`.

**Exercise 7:** What does the cbind command do?  How about rbind?  Create a new object "n" where the first row is a new row of numbers (your choice) and the following rows are the rows from matrix m. Extra credit: do the same but reverse the order of the rows from matrix m.

## Welcome to the Tidyverse

[Tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) a series of R packages that make data manipulation and processing easier.

I have designed a tutorial to introduce you to some of the key features of these packages.  Please run the following code to install and start the tutorial.  I highly recommend keeping a .Rmd notebook file on what you learn.

First, open Chrome; the tutorial will eventially launch there.

Then, in R studio:

```
devtools::install_github("UCDBIS180L/BIS180LTutorials") # only needs to be done once

learnr::run_tutorial("Tidyverse_Introduction", package = "BIS180LTutorials") #do this every time you want to start the tutorial.
```


## Analyzing the BLAST results from Assignment 2 

Now that you have some R fundamentals lets deploy them on the blast results from the previous BLAST lab.

### Data import
The easiest way to bring data into R is in a .csv (comma-separated values) or .tsv/.txt (tab-separated or space-separated values) files.  Today we already have the file in the correct format.  In the future if you need to import other data into R, both of these formats can be created in Excel (choose "Save As..." in Excel and select the correct format).  The relevant R tidyverse import functions are `read_tsv()` and `read_csv()`

Download our BLASTP search of the plant vs worm proteomes from the following links:

[plant_vs_worm](http://jnmaloof.github.io/BIS180L_web/data/plant_vs_worm.blastout_v2.1.gz)

[worm_vs_plant](http://jnmaloof.github.io/BIS180L_web/data/worm_vs_plant.blastout_v2.1.gz) 


These files are 6.8MB and 4.5MB in size uncompressed, but only 2.6MB and 1.7MB compressed. One of the most common problems we run into as bioinformaticians is running out of disk space. Get in the habit of compressing files when you can. In this case, the file is close to 1/3 the original size when compressed. R will read compressed files just fine.

Back in R, import the files:

```r
library(tidyverse)
plant_worm <- read_tsv("~/Downloads/plant_vs_worm.blastout_v2.1.gz",col_names=FALSE)
worm_plant <- read_tsv("~/Downloads/worm_vs_plant.blastout_v2.1.gz",col_names=FALSE)
#change the file name and path to match whatever you used.
#the col_names=FALSE argument tells R that the first row contains data, not column names
```
Look in the right hand pane and you can see a brief description of the data.  There are 114,263 rows and 12 columns in the first file.  It is important that you look at files after they have been read in with the `head()` and `summary()` functions to make sure that the data is as you expect.

```r
head(plant_worm) #first six rows
summary(plant_worm) #summarizes the first 20 columns
```

It is a bit of a bummer that we do not have appropriate column names.  The column name info can be found if you had used `-outfmt 7`. Let's label these with short names.

```r
colnames(plant_worm) <- c("query_id",
                        "subject_id",
                        "pct_ident",
                        "len",
                        "mis",
                        "gaps",
                        "qb",
                        "qe",
                        "sb",
                        "se",
                        "E",
                        "Score")
                        
colnames(worm_plant) <- c("query_id",
                        "subject_id",
                        "pct_ident",
                        "len",
                        "mis",
                        "gaps",
                        "qb",
                        "qe",
                        "sb",
                        "se",
                        "E",
                        "Score")
```
Now lets try the `head()` and `summary()` functions again.

```r
head(plant_worm)
head(worm_plant)
summary(plant_worm)
summary(worm_plant)
```
You can see that `summary()` has provided some nice summary statistics for each numeric column.

Using what you learned from `swirl()` and the Tidyverse tutorial, answer the following questions.  Include your code.

Let's next filter these to retain only the single best hit for each query sequence.

```r
plant_worm_best <- plant_worm %>%
    arrange(query_id, E, desc(Score)) %>%
    filter(!duplicated(query_id))
```

```r
worm_plant_best <- worm_plant %>%
    arrange(query_id, E, desc(Score)) %>%
    filter(!duplicated(query_id))
```

**Exercise 8**:
Explain the logic and function for each line of the code used to create `plant_worm_best` above.  Why was arrange used and why with those arguments?  what is duplicated doing (hint, use `?duplicated` to see the help file), and why is `!` used in that line?

**Exercise 9**:

__For `plant_worm_best` and `worm_plant_best`, answer the following questions__

* How many hits have an e-value of 0?
* How many have hits have a percent identity > 50?
* Recalculate the above values but in percentage of hits rather than absolute values.
* How many hits have an E-value of 0 _and_ have a percent identity less than 50?
* What is the minimum percent identity of the hits with an E-value equal to 0?

_hint_ There are at least two ways to answer the question above, one is using `filter()` and then checking the number of rows of the result.  The second takes advantage of the fact that the logical value TRUE also has the numeric value of 1, whereas false = 0.  So, for example, if we wanted to count the numbers > 5 in the sequence of numbers from 1:10

```r
test <- 1:10 #create sequence of numbers
test # make sure it worked
test > 5 # illustrate logical result
sum(test>5) # number of entries whose value is > 5
```

You might try both methods...


**Excercise 10**:
* Are you surprised that sequences with relatively low percent identity can still have an E-value of 0?
* State a hypothesis about what alignment properties might produce a zero E-value even when the percent identity is less than 50%.
* Test your hypothesis.  (Hint: split the data into E-value = 0 wth >50% ID and E-value = 0 with < 50% ID.  Then compare the median or mean of the alignment properties that form your hypothesis in these groups).

We will continue working with these BLAST results on Tuesday as we learn how to plot.

